---
layout: post
title: 'Full Metal Alchemist: Brotherhood Part 5'
author: Torisuda
tags:
- full metal alchemist
- review
- 'full metal alchemist: brotherhood'
---

Now that Part 4 has finally finished setting up all the dominoes, Part 5 starts knocking them down. It's still a mixed bag compared to Parts 2 and 3, but as almost pure payoff, it's pretty satisfying, with lots of great fight scenes, and its flaws are a lot less egregious than those of Part 4, and almost the exact opposite type: where Part 4 packed in too much story and became hard to follow, Part 5 drags out its story over too many episodes and starts to feel like it's spinning its wheels.

The first major section of the plot in Part 5 is Mustang's fight against Envy. After he and Hawkeye join up with Edward's group to penetrate Father's lair, the zombies pose a much smaller threat since Mustang can just burn through them. Envy, newly reconstituted after escaping from its jar, comes out to face them and brags to Mustang that it killed Hughes, which sends Mustang into a rage. Envy tries a few tricks against Mustang, but its luck has run out; he doesn't fall for its attempts to manipulate his emotions, or its attempt to deceive Hawkeye, and it underestimates his combat abilities several times. Unlike the fight between Mustang and Lust, this fight is totally one-sided, but in an awesome way. The show does such a good job making me hate the Homunculi that it's very satisfying whenever Mustang strikes back against them by repeatedly setting them on fire until even their regeneration abilities can't keep up with being burnt into a cinder.

Unfortunately, the show ruins this awesome moment by having Edward come in and stop Mustang from killing Envy after Mustang's fire has reduced it to its gross lizard fetus body again. Edward, Scar, and Hawkeye all refuse to let him kill it; they fumble around for arguments a little, with Scar ironically and hypocritically arguing that revenge is wrong, before Edward hits on the argument that vengeance isn't a suitable thing for a future leader to seek. Hawkeye picks up on this too, and even holds a gun on Mustang to stop him from killing Envy.

Envy tries to turn Scar against the group by reminding him that they're all filthy alchemists who destroyed Ishval. Edward tells Envy he's realized that it looks down on humanity because it's jealous, which Envy of course denies. Finally, Envy commits suicide by pulling out its own Philosopher's Stone, and dies.

Envy has always been the least sympathetic of the Homunculi to me, and that's a big reason why the way this played out rankled me so much. It never had a motive you could understand, like Greed or Wrath. It never had a humanizing moment, like Pride admitting to Alphonse that he cares about Mrs. Bradley. It never showed a personality, like the childish stupidity we saw from Gluttony when he guided Alphonse to Father's lair. Envy's only personality was being obnoxious and bloodthirsty. It murdered Hughes, murdered a child to start the Ishvalan war, sneaked around starting who knows how many other wars and directly causing who knows how many deaths. It was manipulative, arrogant, savage, totally without redeeming qualities, and it shouldn't have been allowed to die on its own terms. It's the sort of villain that you let the heroes kill off to give the viewers catharsis, to let us believe that yes, evil gets what it deserves. As soon as Edward saves its life, it immediately starts showing why it needs to die by attempting to turn Scar against everyone else---not only is it evil, it's also dangerous, because of its ability to manipulate people into doing what it wants, just as it manipulated May to bring it back to Central so this fight could even take place.

But the scene also doesn't work well because it's so unclear why they're actually letting Envy live. Scar argues that revenge is wrong; Edward seems to start out in his usual mode of "killing is never justified", but then switches to "a leader should never seek revenge"; and I can't remember why Hawkeye was against it. If there was a compelling reason why they were acting that way, I might have been okay with it even though I thought Envy deserved to be killed, but there wasn't. Edward's argument that a leader shouldn't indulge in revenge was the beginning of a good reason, but given how dangerous Envy is, even reduced to lizard fetus form, it would have had more impact if they'd let Hawkeye kill it, as she suggests early on. Then there would have been a clear motive: sometimes a leader needs someone to die for the good of their people, but it should be for the good of the people, not for personal satisfaction. To be a good leader in this scenario, Mustang needs to kill Envy, because it's dangerous to the people he hopes to lead (all of Amestris), and not because it murdered his best friend and he wants to see it burn. Instead, everyone proceeds to ignore Hawkeye, and she just drops the idea.

Even though that would have been a clear reason for not killing Envy, I would still have this problem with it: don't take leadership advice from Edward. He's incredibly selfish, self-righteous, and a moral absolutist who doesn't understand nuance. In short, he's not very smart. He might be an alchemic genius, but he doesn't have good insight into the consequences of his own actions, and he tries to make up for his past mistakes by imposing rigid moral codes on himself and others instead of really understanding what happened. He would make a terrible leader. The few times in the series that people have followed his lead, it either turned out badly (Alphonse followed him into trying to transmute their mother back to life and lost his entire body for it), or it turned out well by sheer luck (Bebop and Rocksteady just happened to hate Kimblee, which freed Edward from the burden of what would happen if they destroyed the plan and got his friends all killed by snitching to Kimblee everything they heard). What happens at the end of the series (which we'll get to in good time) illustrates my point about Edward exactly.

Anyway, while this is going on underground, the fight continues above ground. Armstrong manages to take down Sloth in an awesome battle of giant shirtless muscle men, with help from Izumi's husband Sig, the butcher. Izumi herself also joins in. Outside the castle, Bradley returns and fights a tank on foot with a sword. He also kills Captain Buccaneer, the gigantic soldier from Briggs with the chainsaw hand. Ling / Greed fights him off alongside Fu, who is killed; with the help of a Briggs soldier, they mortally wound Bradley and knocked him off the wall into the moat. With Greed's help, the Briggs soldiers retake the castle and declare victory. Meanwhile, Al is getting into all kinds of hilarious slapstick situations with Yoki, Marcoh, and Heinkel, like when their car gets a flat tire and they can't be at the battle.

Ed, Mustang, Hawkeye, and Scar reach an underground room where the doctor who created Bradley is waiting for them. Ed, Al, and Izumi are teleported to where Father is. Father has turned into a weird purple eye-covered blog and stuck Hohenheim through his stomach for some reason. Hohenheim, Ed, Al, and Izumi are the sacrifices, but Father needs a fifth. The doctor tries to force Mustang to perform human transmutation by cutting Hawkeye's throat. May and the chimeras barge in and the frog man grabs the doctor with gooey spit, but Bradley and Pride show up and force Mustang to open the gate, transmuting the doctor into a gross ball. Mustang pops out in Father's lair, now blind as the price of opening the gate. During this whole ordeal, Al also passes out. He returns to the gate and meets up with his body. He has a chance to reunite with it, but he realizes that his body is emaciated and too weak to even stand, so he gives up the chance to reclaim his body and keeps the armor so he can help his friends fight. I really liked this: Al makes an actual sacrifice for the benefit of other people, not knowing if he'll ever be able to come back and get his body. Of course, it means nothing, because he contributes nothing to the final battle, which is all Ed, as usual. Meanwhile, Scar and Bradley fight in the underground room and Scar kills Bradley, who gets a good long death scene to make a speech in.

Father enacts his ultimate evil plan, steals the souls of everyone in the country, and merges with God, becoming a blond-haired Adonis. However, due to some complicated jiggery-pokery involving another nationwide transmutation circle created by Hohenheim and using the shadow of the moon cast by the eclipse, as well as yet another nationwide transmutation circle from Scar, based on his brother's notes, everyone is reversed and everyone gets their souls back. Father raises himself out of his lair to the courtyard at Central, planning to turn whoever he can find into another Philosopher's Stone. Everyone else follows him except Ed, who is pulled back down by Pride. They fight, but just when Pride is about to win and steal Edward's body, Kimblee pops out of Pride in his predicted ghost appearance and holds him back so that Edward can attack Pride and reduce it to its embryonic body, which looks like a tiny human fetus. As I predicted, they couldn't bring any closure to Kimblee in a short ghost appearance with everything else that's going on. I didn't understand why he appeared, or why they took a side-trip for this Ed / Pride battle at all, since it ends up meaning almost nothing in the end.

Everyone fights Father up in the courtyard. Even Mustang gets a few shots in, with Hawkeye spotting for him. Eventually it just comes down to Edward fighting while everyone else watches for some reason. After Ed's automail is crushed again, Alphonse realizes that if he sacrifices his soul, Ed can get back his arm back, and he does just that. With some help from Greed, who sacrifices himself despite Ling's attempts to stop him, Ed defeats Father and he crumbles into dust. We find out that Father came from inside the Doorway to Truth, making it some kind of heavenly rebel, so it's basically Satan.

Hohenheim offers to sacrifice his own body to bring Al back since he's been alive for so long, but Edward refuses to let him. He apologizes for leaving them alone and admits that a lot of the bad things they went through wouldn't have happened if he'd been around. Ed actually cries, and then he opens the Doorway to Truth again and sacrifices his ability to do alchemy to get Al back, because ever since Shou Tucker fused his daughter Nina with his dog to create a chimera, Ed's realized that alchemy sucks and friends are the real magic. He gets Al back, in his human body, and in 50,000 fanfics they fuck, but in the actual show they just make eyes and then go back to the real world. We then see Hohenheim die, kneeling in front of Trisha's grave, but the moment is ruined because they play the opening, which, as I mentioned when I talked about Part 4, is weird boy band music. Imagine if Peter Jackson had decided that the appropriate soundtrack to accompany Boromir's death scene in _The Fellowship of the Ring_ was "Bye Bye Bye" by NSYNC, and you have a good idea of how ruined this moment was.

In the epilogue, we get to see Ed and Al reunited with Winry. Winry jump-glomps Al, which probably should have killed him, given how emaciated he was. Al heads off on a journey with Bebop and Rocksteady to go to Xing and learn more about alchemy so he can help them get their original bodies back. Ling, Lan-Fan, and May headed back there after the battle with Father. Ling had a Philosopher's Stone, so he was convinced he would be the next emperor, but he promised to protect May's clan. May evidently does fine, because we see her later in a big family picture with Ed, Al, Winry, and Ed and Winry's children. We find out that Mustang healed his sight, as well as Havoc's legs, with a Philosopher's Stone that Marcoh had left over, and became some kind of high-ranking official heading up a project to restore Ishval, which Major Miles and Scar worked together on. Olivier Armstrong returns to the north to put things in order there, and General Grumman, the weird old sexual harassing general from the east who may or may not have been plotting against Mustang and Armstrong but that might have just been Major Miles's conjecture, becomes the Führer. Pride's fetus grows into a version of Selim with a plug on his head who doesn't seem to be a murderous shadow monster, and Mrs. Bradley raises him as her son, believing that her husband was on the side of right. We are led to believe that they all lived happily ever after.

## The Problem of Edward

I've been slowly losing respect for Edward ever since Part 3. Whatever I had left really evaporated during Part 5. 

In the earlier parts of the show, and in the 2003 series, Edward was an alchemic genius who believed in the power of alchemy to accomplish things. His character arc was learning that there were limits to what alchemy could achieve and that sometimes alchemy could have undesirable effects.

## Thematic Confusion

_Full Metal Alchemist: Brotherhood_ is incredibly ambitious. 
